Come now, what masques, what dances shall we have
to wear away the long age of three hours
between our after-supper and bed-time?
Where is our usual manager of mirth?
What revels are in hand?
Is there no play to ease the anguish of a torturing hour?
Call Philostrate.
Here, mighty Theseus.
Say, what abridgement have you for this evening?
What masque?
What music?
How shall we beguile the lazy time, if not with some delight?
There is a brief how many sports are ripe.
Make choice of which your highness will see first.
"The battle with the Centaurs
to be sung By an Athenian eunuch to the harp."
We'll none of that.
That have I told my love in glory of my kinsman Hercules.
"The riot of the tipsy Bacchanals
tearing the Thracian singer in their rage."
That is an old device, and it was played
when I from Thebes came last a conqueror.
"The thrice three muses mourning for the death of learning,
late deceased in beggary."
That is some satire, keen and critical,
not sorting with a nuptial ceremony.
"A tedious brief scene of young Pyramus and his love Thisbe,
very tragical mirth."
Merry and tragical.
Tedious and brief.
That is, hot ice and wondrous strange snow.
How shall we find the concord of this discord?
A play there is, my lord, some ten words long,
which is as brief as I have known a play.
But by ten words, my lord, it is too long,
which makes it tedious.
For in all the play, there is not one word apt,
one player fitted.
And tragical, my noble lord, it is.
For Pyramus therein doth kill himself.
Which, when I saw rehearsed,
I must confess made mine eyes water,
but more merry tears the passion of loud laughter never shed.
What are they that do play it?
Hard-handed men that work in Athens here,
which never laboured in their minds till now
and now have toiled their unbreathed memories
with this same play against your nuptial.
And we will hear it.
No, my noble lord.
It is not for you.
I have heard it over, and it is nothing, nothing in the world.
Unless you can find sport in their intents,
extremely stretched and conned with cruel pain
to do you service.
I will hear that play, for never anything can be amiss
when simpleness and duty tender it.
Go, bring them in.
I love not to see wretchedness o'er charged
and duty in his service perishing.
Why, gentle sweet, you shall see no such thing.
He says they can do nothing in this kind.
The kinder we, to give them thanks for nothing.
Our sport shall be to take what they mistake.
And what poor duty cannot do,
noble respect takes it in might, not merit.
Where I have come, great clerks have purposed
to greet me with premeditated welcomes
where I have seen them shiver and look pale,
make periods in the midst of sentences,
throttle their practised accents in their fears,
and in conclusion, dumbly have broke off,
not paying me a welcome.
Trust me, sweet, out of this silence yet I picked a welcome.
And in the modesty of fearful duty,
I read as much as in the rattling tongue
of saucy and audacious eloquence.
Love, therefore, and tongue-tied simplicity
in least speak most to my capacity.
So please your grace, the Prologue is addressed.
Let him approach.
If we offend, it is with our good will.
That you should think we come not to offend,
but with good will
to show our simple skill.
Th--
That is the true beginning of our end.
Consider then we come but in despite.
We do not come as minding to content you.
Our true intent is all for your delight.
We are not here that you should here repent you,
The actors are at hand, and by their show,
you shall know all that you are like to know.
Gentles, perchance you wonder at this show.
But wonder on, till truth make all things plain.
This man is Pyramus, if you would know.
This beauteous lady Thisbe is certain.
This man, with lime and rough-cast,
doth present Wall,
that vile wall which did these lovers sunder.
And through Wall's chink, poor souls,
they are content to whisper.
At the which let no man wonder.
This man, with lantern, dog, and bush of thorn,
presenteth Moonshine;
For, if you will know, by moonshine
did these lovers think no scorn to meet at Ninus' tomb,
there, there to woo.
This grisly beast, which Lion hight by name,
the trusty Thisbe, coming first by night,
did scare away, or rather did affright.
And, as she fled, her mantle she did fall,
which Lion vile with bloody mouth did stain.
Anon comes Pyramus, sweet youth and tall
and finds his trusty Thisbe's mantle slain.
Whereat, with blade, with bloody, blameful blade,
he bravely broached his boiling, bloody breast.
And Thisbe, tarrying in mulberry shade,
his dagger drew and died.
For all the rest, let Lion, Moonshine, Wall,
and lovers twain at large discourse
while here they do remain.
In this same interlude, it doth befall that I,
one Snout by name, present a wall.
And such a wall, as I will have you think,
that had in it a crannied hole or chink
through which the lovers, Pyramus and Thisbe,
did whisper often very secretly.
This loam, this rough-cast and this stone
doth show that I am that same wall.
The truth is so, and this the cranny is,
right and sinister,
through which the fearful lovers are to whisper.
Oh, grim-looked night.
Oh, night with hue so black.
Oh, night, which ever art when day is not.
Oh, night, Oh, night.
Alack, alack, alack,
I fear my Thisbe's promise is forgot.
And thou, oh, wall, oh sweet, oh, lovely wall
that standest between her father's ground and mine.
Thou wall, oh, wall, oh, sweet and lovely wall,
show me thy chink, to blink through with mine eyne.
Thanks, courteous wall.
Jove shield thee well for this.
But what see I?
No Thisbe do I see.
Oh, wicked wall, through whom I see no bliss.
Cursed be thy stones for thus deceiving me.
The wall, methinks, being sensible, should curse again.
No, in truth, sir, he should not.
"Deceiving me" is Thisbe's cue.
She is to enter now, and I am to spy her through the wall.
You shall see, it will fall pat as I told you.
Oh, wall, full often hast thou heard my moans
for parting my fair Pyramus and me.
My cherry lips have often kissed thy stones,
thy stones with lime and hair knit up in thee.
I see a voice.
Now will I to the chink to spy.
An I can hear my Thisbe's face.
Thisbe.
My love, thou art my love, I think.
Think what thou wilt.
I am thy lover's grace.
And, like Limander, am I trusty still.
And I like Helen, till the Fates me kill.
Not Shafalus to Procrus was so true.
As Shafalus to Procrus, I to you.
Oh, kiss me through the hole of this vile wall.
I kiss the wall's hole, not your lips at all.
Wilt thou at Ninny's tomb meet me straightway?
'Tide life, 'tide death, I come without delay.
Thus have I, Wall, my part discharged so.
And, being done, thus Wall away doth go.
This is the silliest stuff that ever I heard.
The best in this kind are but shadows.
And the worst are no worse if imagination amend them.
It must be your imagination then, and not theirs.
If we imagine no worse of them than they of themselves,
they may pass for excellent men.
Ladies, you whose gentle hearts
do fear the smallest monstrous mouse that creeps on floor
may now perchance both quake and tremble here
when lion rough in wildest rage doth roar.
Then know that I, one Snug the joiner,
am a lion-fell, nor else no lion's dam;.
For, if I should as Lion
come in strife into your place,
'twere pity on my life.
A very gentle beast of a good conscience.
Let us listen to the moon.
This lantern doth the horned moon,
the horned moon present.
Myself the man in the moon do seem to be.
This is the greatest error of all the rest.
The man should be put into the lantern.
How is it else the man in the moon?
He dare not come there for the candle.
For, you see, it is already in snuff.
I am aweary of this moon.
Would it would change.
It would appear, by his small light of discretion,
that he is in the wane.
But yet, in courtesy, in all reason,
we must stay the time.
Proceed, Moon.
All that I have to say
is to tell you that the lantern is the moon;
I, the man in the moon;
this thorn-bush, my thorn-bush;
and this dog, my dog.
This is old Ninny's tomb.
Where is my love?
ARR!!
Well roared, Lion.
Well run, Thisbe.
Well shone, Moon.
Well moused, Lion.
And then came Pyramus.
And so the lion vanished.
Sweet moon, I thank thee for thy sunny beams.
I thank thee, moon, for shining now so bright.
For by thy gracious, golden, glittering gleams,
I trust to take of truest Thisbe sight.
But stay, O spite.
But mark, poor knight, what dreadful dole is here.
Eyes, do you see?
How can it be?
Oh, dainty duck.
Oh, dear.
Thy mantle good, what, stained with blood!
Approach, ye Furies fell.
Oh, Fates, come, come.
Cut thread and thrum.
Quail, crush, conclude, and quell.
Beshrew my heart, but I pity the man.
Oh, wherefore, Nature, didst thou lion's frame?
Since lion vile hath here deflowered my dear,
which is--
no, no--
which was the fairest dame
that lived, that loved, that liked,
that looked with cheer.
Come, tears, confound.
Out, sword, and wound the pap of Pyramus.
Ay, that left pap, where heart doth hop.
Thus die I, thus, thus, thus.
Now am I dead,
Now am I fled.
My soul is in the sky.
Tongue, lose thy light.
Moon, take thy flight.
Now die...die...
die..die...die...
die.
How chance Moonshine is gone
before Thisbe comes back and finds her lover?
She will find him by starlight.
Here she comes.
And her passion ends the play.
What, dead, my dove?
O Pyramus, arise!
Speak, speak.
Quite dumb.
Dead, dead.
A tomb must cover thy sweet eyes.
These lily lips, this cherry nose,
these yellow cowslip cheeks are gone, are gone.
Oh, lovers, make moan.
His eyes were green as leeks.
Oh, Sisters three, come, come to me.
With hands as pale as milk, lay them in gore
since you have shore with shears his thread of silk.
Tongue, not a word.
Come, trusty sword.
Come, blade, my breast imbrue.
And, farewell, friends.
Thus Thisbe ends.
Adieu, adieu, adieu.
Moonshine and Lion are left to bury the dead.
Ay, and Wall too.
No, I assure you;
the wall is down that parted their fathers.
Will it please you to see the epilogue
or to hear a Bergomask dance between our company?
Uh, no epilogue, I pray you,
for your play needs no excuse.
Never excuse,
for when all the players are dead, there need none to be blamed.
But come, your Bergomask.
Let your epilogue alone.
The iron tongue of midnight hath told twelve.
Lovers, to bed.
'Tis almost fairy time.
I fear we shall out-sleep the coming morn
as much as we this night have over-watched.
This palpable-gross play
hath well beguiled the heavy gait of night.
Sweet friends, to bed.
Now the hungry lion roars, and the wolf behowls the moon
whilst the heavy ploughman snores,
all with weary task fordone.
Now the wasted brands do glow,
whilst the screech-owl, screeching loud,
puts the wretch that lies in woe in remembrance of a shroud.
Now it is the time of night that the graves all gaping wide,
every one lets forth his sprite,
in the church-way paths to glide.
And we fairies, that do run by the triple Hecate's team
from the presence of the sun following darkness like a dream
now are frolic.
Not a mouse shall disturb this hallowed house.
I am sent with broom before
to sweep the dust behind the door.
Through the house, give gathering light.
By the dead and drowsy fire,
every elf and fairy sprite hop as light as bird from brier.
And this ditty, after me, sing and dance it trippingly.
First, rehearse your song by rote
to each word a warbling note.
Hand in hand, with fairy grace, will we sing and bless this place.
Now, until the break of day, through this house each fairy stray.
To the best bride-bed will we,
which by us shall blessed be.
And the issue there create ever shall be fortunate.
So shall all the couples three ever true in loving be.
And the blots of Nature's hand shall not in their issue stand.
Never mole, hare lip, nor scar, nor mark prodigious,
such as are despised in nativity,
shall upon their children be.
With this field-dew consecrate, every fairy take his gait.
And each several chamber bless, through this palace,
with sweet peace.
And the owner of it blessed ever shall in safety rest.
Trip away.
Make no stay.
Meet me all by break of day.
If we shadows have offended,
think but this, and all is mended,
that you have but slumbered here while these visions did appear.
And this weak and idle themeno more yielding but a dream.
Gentles, do not reprehend.
If you pardon, we will mend.
And, as I am an honest Puck, if we have unearned luck
now to escape the serpent's tongue,
we will make amends ere long, else the Puck a liar call.
So, good night unto you all.